tutor-sso-redirect/README.md, before:

# Tutor SSO Redirect Plugin

This plugin forces BOTH legacy Open edX (localhost:8000) and MFE (apps.local.openedx.io:1999) to redirect directly to your SSO provider (Zitadel), bypassing the authn MFE completely.

## What This Fixes

- **Legacy Open edX** (localhost:8000) no longer redirects to MFE for login
- **Both legacy and MFE** routes go directly to SSO
- No more redirect loops between legacy → MFE → SSO
- Complete bypass of authn MFE
- Fixes "Can't fetch setting of a disabled backend/provider" error

## Quick Installation

```bash
# 1. Install the plugin
pip install -e /path/to/tutor-sso-redirect

# 2. Enable it
tutor plugins enable sso-redirect

# 3. Configure your Zitadel credentials
tutor config save --set SSO_OIDC_KEY="your-client-id@projectname"
tutor config save --set SSO_OIDC_SECRET="your-client-secret"
tutor config save --set SSO_OIDC_ENDPOINT="https://your-zitadel-instance.zitadel.cloud"

# 4. Save and restart
tutor config save
tutor local restart
```

## CRITICAL: Configure OIDC in Django Admin

**This step is required or you'll get "Can't fetch setting of a disabled backend/provider"**

1. Access Django admin at http://localhost:8000/admin
2. Go to **Third Party Auth** → **OAuth2 Provider Configs**
3. Add a new config with:
   - **Enabled**: ✓
   - **Name**: `oidc` (MUST be exactly 'oidc')
   - **Slug**: `oidc` 
   - **Backend name**: `social_core.backends.open_id_connect.OpenIdConnectAuth`
   - **Client ID**: Your Zitadel client ID
   - **Client Secret**: Your Zitadel client secret
   - **Other settings**:
     ```json
     {
       "OIDC_ENDPOINT": "https://your-zitadel-instance.zitadel.cloud"
     }
     ```

See [ZITADEL_SETUP.md](ZITADEL_SETUP.md) for detailed Zitadel configuration.

## How It Works

1. **Completely disables authn MFE** by setting:
   - `AUTHN_MICROFRONTEND_URL = None`
   - `ENABLE_AUTHN_MICROFRONTEND = False`

2. **Enables OIDC backend** with proper authentication settings

3. **Aggressive middleware** that intercepts ALL login/register URLs and redirects to SSO

4. **URL overrides** that catch requests before they can redirect to MFE

## Testing

Test both legacy and MFE routes:

```bash
python test_both_routes.py http://localhost:8000 http://apps.local.openedx.io:1999
```

Expected output:
```
Legacy login: http://localhost:8000/login
  ✓ CORRECT - Redirects to SSO

Legacy register: http://localhost:8000/register
  ✓ CORRECT - Redirects to SSO

MFE authn login: http://apps.local.openedx.io:1999/authn/login
  ✓ CORRECT - Redirects to SSO
```

## URLs That Get Redirected

ALL of these go directly to your SSO:

### Legacy URLs
- `/login`
- `/register`
- `/signin`
- `/signup`
- `/user_api/v1/account/login_session/`

### MFE URLs
- `/authn/login`
- `/authn/register`
- `/authn/logistration`

### Any URL containing
- `login`
- `signin`
- `register`
- `signup`

## Troubleshooting

### "Can't fetch setting of a disabled backend/provider"

You need to configure the OIDC provider in Django admin. See the "Configure OIDC in Django Admin" section above.

### Still redirecting to MFE?

1. Clear your browser cache
2. Check the logs:
   ```bash
   tutor local logs -f lms | grep "SSO Redirect"
   ```
3. Verify MFE is disabled:
   ```bash
   tutor local exec lms python /openedx/check_middleware.py
   ```

### Redirect loops?

Check your Zitadel redirect URLs include:
- `http://localhost:8000/auth/complete/oidc/`
- `http://localhost:8001/auth/complete/oidc/`
- `http://apps.local.openedx.io:1999/auth/complete/oidc/`

## License

AGPLv3

Commit message:

Add MFE authentication support with proper flow
- Added SSO_USE_MFE configuration option (defaults to true)
- Added SSO_MFE_URL configuration for MFE location
- Modified middleware to redirect to MFE instead of directly to Zitadel
- Updated URL patterns to work with MFE flow
- Added conditional settings for MFE vs direct mode
- Created MFE_ZITADEL_SETUP.md documentation
- Updated README with dual-mode support

The plugin now supports two modes:
1. MFE Mode (default): LMS -> MFE -> Zitadel -> MFE -> LMS
2. Direct Mode: LMS -> Zitadel -> LMS

This allows proper integration with the Authentication MFE while maintaining
the option to bypass it for direct SSO if needed.

tutor-sso-redirect/README.md, after:

# Tutor SSO Redirect Plugin

This plugin provides flexible SSO integration for Open edX with Zitadel. It supports two modes:

1. **MFE Mode (Default)**: Uses the Authentication MFE as an intermediary
2. **Direct Mode**: Bypasses MFE and redirects directly to SSO

## What This Fixes

- **Proper MFE Integration**: Legacy Open edX redirects to MFE, which then handles SSO
- **Flexible routing**: Choose between MFE flow or direct SSO redirect
- **Session persistence**: Ensures users stay logged in after SSO authentication
- **Auto-configuration**: Automatically configures OIDC provider in database
- Fixes "Can't fetch setting of a disabled backend/provider" error

## Quick Installation

```bash
# 1. Install the plugin
pip install -e /path/to/tutor-sso-redirect

# 2. Enable it
tutor plugins enable sso-redirect

# 3. Configure your Zitadel credentials
tutor config save --set SSO_OIDC_KEY="your-client-id@projectname"
tutor config save --set SSO_OIDC_SECRET="your-client-secret"
tutor config save --set SSO_OIDC_ENDPOINT="https://your-zitadel-instance.zitadel.cloud"

# 4. Choose authentication mode (optional, defaults to MFE mode)
# For MFE mode (default):
tutor config save --set SSO_USE_MFE=true
tutor config save --set SSO_MFE_URL="http://apps.local.openedx.io:1999"

# For direct SSO mode (bypass MFE):
# tutor config save --set SSO_USE_MFE=false

# 5. Save and restart
tutor config save
tutor local restart
```

## CRITICAL: Configure OIDC in Django Admin

**This step is required or you'll get "Can't fetch setting of a disabled backend/provider"**

1. Access Django admin at http://localhost:8000/admin
2. Go to **Third Party Auth** → **OAuth2 Provider Configs**
3. Add a new config with:
   - **Enabled**: ✓
   - **Name**: `oidc` (MUST be exactly 'oidc')
   - **Slug**: `oidc` 
   - **Backend name**: `social_core.backends.open_id_connect.OpenIdConnectAuth`
   - **Client ID**: Your Zitadel client ID
   - **Client Secret**: Your Zitadel client secret
   - **Other settings**:
     ```json
     {
       "OIDC_ENDPOINT": "https://your-zitadel-instance.zitadel.cloud"
     }
     ```

See [ZITADEL_SETUP.md](ZITADEL_SETUP.md) for detailed Zitadel configuration.

## How It Works

### MFE Mode (Default)
1. User clicks login on LMS (http://91.107.146.137:8000/)
2. Redirected to MFE (http://apps.local.openedx.io:1999/authn/login)
3. MFE shows Zitadel login option
4. User authenticates with Zitadel
5. Returns to MFE, then redirected to LMS dashboard

### Direct Mode
1. **Disables authn MFE** by setting:
   - `AUTHN_MICROFRONTEND_URL = None`
   - `ENABLE_AUTHN_MICROFRONTEND = False`
2. **Aggressive middleware** intercepts ALL login/register URLs
3. **Direct redirect** to Zitadel SSO
4. Returns directly to LMS after authentication

## Testing

Test both legacy and MFE routes:

```bash
python test_both_routes.py http://localhost:8000 http://apps.local.openedx.io:1999
```

Expected output:
```
Legacy login: http://localhost:8000/login
  ✓ CORRECT - Redirects to SSO

Legacy register: http://localhost:8000/register
  ✓ CORRECT - Redirects to SSO

MFE authn login: http://apps.local.openedx.io:1999/authn/login
  ✓ CORRECT - Redirects to SSO
```

## URLs That Get Redirected

ALL of these go directly to your SSO:

### Legacy URLs
- `/login`
- `/register`
- `/signin`
- `/signup`
- `/user_api/v1/account/login_session/`

### MFE URLs
- `/authn/login`
- `/authn/register`
- `/authn/logistration`

### Any URL containing
- `login`
- `signin`
- `register`
- `signup`

## Troubleshooting

### "Can't fetch setting of a disabled backend/provider"

You need to configure the OIDC provider in Django admin. See the "Configure OIDC in Django Admin" section above.

### Still redirecting to MFE?

1. Clear your browser cache
2. Check the logs:
   ```bash
   tutor local logs -f lms | grep "SSO Redirect"
   ```
3. Verify MFE is disabled:
   ```bash
   tutor local exec lms python /openedx/check_middleware.py
   ```

### Redirect loops?

Check your Zitadel redirect URLs include:
- `http://localhost:8000/auth/complete/oidc/`
- `http://localhost:8001/auth/complete/oidc/`
- `http://apps.local.openedx.io:1999/auth/complete/oidc/`

## License

AGPLv3
